Welcome to the Life Church Podcast.
We are in Acts 2.42 community, a family on a mission to bring a life of Jesus to warranty.
We hope you're ready to hear what God has to say to you today through His Word and by His Spirit.
We are looking at the Roman Road series, which is about how salvation works as the Apostle Paul teaches in the book of Romans.
And I'm going to return to an analogy today a few different times.
And I guess this is kind of a trigger warning.
It's a medical analogy.
If you're struggling with health care issues, that could be not the most fun analogy.
But I think it's the best one that describes what we're talking about.
Anyone here work for the NHS or for health care?
Thank you for all that you do.
I appreciate it.
And of course, most of us then know what it's like to have to go to get
treatment or to go to have a doctor look at us for some reason.
And so within that world, you always have the symptoms, whatever we're experiencing.
And then you have the actual underlying disease that is whatever the doctor hopefully will be able to tell you what the actual reason is that you're experiencing those symptoms.
And then there's, there's treatment, but before the treatment, there has to be payment.
Now, again, with the NHS, see, okay, I'm not from here.
I'm not from here.
So for me, when in America, when we would go to see the doctor, before you even saw the doctor, they would make sure you could pay the doctor.
Whether they would check your health insurance, or they would check that you would be able to do it, or you had to pay, and then you could be made well, hopefully.
Whereas here, of course, it's not that way.
But of course, everyone that raised your hand that says you work for the NHS, obviously
you get paid, which means there is a cost, right?
Someone pays the cost, it's through taxes, through other means, but there is a cost to the treatment.
And so when we're looking at the Romans' road through this lens, you have week one where we talked about all have sinned, all have sinned.
This was both the symptoms and the disease for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, for the wages of sin is death, for the verses that we looked at.
And this was the bad news before the good news.
This was the doctor sitting us down and telling us the problem that explains our symptoms.
And we might not like it, but this is a necessary part of the process.
In this case, the disease that explains all the symptoms of our life, why we're dying is sin.
It's a mixture of our own sin and just the toxic sin soup you can
trademark that, I just made it up.
The sin soup of humanity that we cooperate to just make life miserable for each other, that's the issue.
But the same doctor also has a treatment plan that has 100% success rate.
Are you thankful for that?
And that's what we started talking about last week, which week two was Christ died for us.
This was the payment.
Christ died for us, but God demonstrates his own love for us in this.
While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
Before you could pay him back, before you earned it or owed it or anything like that, Jesus took care of the payment with his own death.
Are you thankful for that?
But here's the catch.
Here's the catch.
You need to take the treatment in order for it to be effective.
Imagine if you had a serious health issue and you went to the doctor and the doctor diagnosed it properly and said, okay, here's the treatment plan.
We're going to have surgery on this date.
You're going to have this medication.
And then we go, yeah, I can't be bothered.
I don't want to get off my couch.
I'm just leave the treatment there.
Now we can kind of like laugh at that a bit, but then we realize that actually happens both in real life and in our spiritual lives because sometimes the treatment is invasive and the treatment kind of scares us.
But the treatment is what is needed, and we have to trust the doctor in this case.
So what is the treatment?
Paul says it has two parts.
In Romans 10, 9, it is confess and believe.
Let's read it together from the screen.
We'll do this a few times today.
Romans 10, 9, let's say it.
If you confess with your mouth, Jesus is Lord.
and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
I always forget I have an accent until we talk together and I'm like, I can't even speak.
Anyway, confess and believe, confess and believe.
So let's break it down.
Let's start with confess.
When we think of applying salvation to our lives and when we talk about confessing, usually we think of admitting sin.
repentance, that kind of thing.
We think of 1 John 1, 9, where John tells us, if we confess our sins, he's faithful and just and will forgive us our sins and purify us from all unrighteousness.
And of course, that is 100% true.
But that's not what Paul says here.
He says, if we confess, Jesus is Lord.
So what does confessing actually mean?
Confessing simply means to declare something publicly is true.
to declare something publicly is true.
So if you confess your sins, you're saying, yep, I did that.
That's on me, I'm a sinner.
You're saying that publicly, that's confessing our sins.
But if you're saying Jesus is Lord, if you're confessing Jesus is Lord, you're saying publicly, yes, Jesus has authority over my life.
Jesus has authority over my life and I can say that publicly.
So what is it to be saved?
Do we confess our sins or do we confess Jesus as Lord?
Well, of course it's both.
But why does Paul focus on lordship in this verse?
I think it's simply this because our allegiance matters.
Our allegiance matters.
Confession of sin is definitely part of the plan of salvation, but it isn't the whole.
There are
Christian traditions that really emphasize the confession of sin, maybe to a spiritual leader or to a priest so that we can be forgiven.
And this is fine, this is good and proper.
But if all we focus on is confession and forgiveness, it can leave the allegiance of our heart unchanged.
Because we can just believe, well, God will just forgive any sin as long as I just confess and ask for forgiveness.
And then our life can just remain under our own lordship
And Jesus just becomes the kind-hearted doormat that we just trample on and assume he'll just forgive us because he said he would.
That's not the way it's supposed to work.
I think we can all agree with that.
This is how confession is supposed to work.
It's a change of allegiance.
It's saying, X, something used to be my Lord, but now Jesus is.
Sin used to be my Lord.
But now Jesus is, I don't want sin to be my Lord anymore.
I'm confessing my sin and now I want Jesus to be my Lord.
Selfishness has been my Lord.
Pride has been my Lord.
Comfort has been my Lord.
The approval of others has been my Lord, but not anymore.
Jesus is.
But it goes beyond just rejecting any of the internal rule of various things in our lives.
It's also about Jesus
being the supreme authority over any other external authority.
You know, Paul wrote this letter to the church in Rome.
This was the capital of the empire.
If we're talking Star Wars, this is Coruscant, okay?
This is the capital of the empire.
It was extremely significant because the summary statement of Roman power of the day was simply Caesar's Lord.
Caesar is Lord.
And this was a common phrase used in all levels of society.
This was part of daily life.
It was a statement of royal power saying that Caesar is king.
It was a statement of spiritual power because Caesar's past were venerated as gods and even Caesar's presence sometimes were venerated as a god while they were still alive.
So it was a statement of spiritual power.
And basically it just publicly identified you as a good citizen.
It just publicly identified you as a good citizen.
If you could say Caesar is Lord, you could go about your normal life.
Caesar is Lord was the password to living a normal life.
But as Christians, we don't get the password to a normal life.
We get the password to eternal life.
And that public password is Jesus is Lord.
Because allegiance isn't allegiance if it remains private.
Right?
Allegiance is an allegiance if it just remains private.
Now, was Paul encouraging the Roman Christians to just rebel and to burn down the society?
Of course not.
In fact, in chapter 13, he clearly encourages Christians to fully participate in civic life, to pay their taxes, to pray for
the governing authorities to respect governing authorities as something God had set up to help humanity flourish.
Paul himself was a Roman citizen.
Paul himself would appeal to Caesar as part of his legal proceedings.
The only thing to withhold from Caesar was ultimate allegiance.
That was to be reserved for Jesus alone.
Jesus himself said, what?
Give to Caesar, what is Caesar's?
But give to God.
what belongs to God.
Caesar can have your taxes.
It pays for the NHS.
But God gets our allegiance.
Now, I don't believe that Paul is saying that we just have to walk around every day and every time we tap our card to the till go, Jesus is Lord.
Jesus is Lord.
Okay, it doesn't have to be this thing we're just constantly saying, like a mantra.
There's wisdom, there's nuance, and how we share it depending on context.
But when push comes to shove, and there's a direct challenge to what we believe, or a direct challenge on who to obey, there could only be one answer, and that is Jesus is Lord.
And of course, we show this very publicly at one time events, like our public baptism.
That's us saying publicly to the whole world, whoever's here, Jesus is Lord.
There's quiet ways, though, to say it, like acting with integrity, acting with honesty, and all our public dealings.
If we're asked by our employer to do something that Jesus would not do, we need to politely and firmly assert that we have a different authority that we answer to.
And in normal conversation, when people want us to be like them and how they live, how they love, how they speak, we lovingly stand firm in our allegiance to Jesus.
Of course, there's many biblical examples of this, both positive and negative.
Probably the biggest positive example we have is in the book of Daniel with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who were told, of course, they were captives living, they were Jews that now lived in Babylon, but they were working within that government system.
And of course, Nebuchadnezzar decides to build a statue of himself and say, everyone has to bow down and worship me in the form of a statue.
And at the time, the password, so to speak, was
Nebuchadnezzar is Lord, and I will bow down.
But they didn't use that password, and they passed the test, right?
They were thrown into the fiery furnace, but God rescued them.
That was great.
Why were they able to do that?
Well, I think God helped them.
I think they had some courage, of course, on their own.
But also, they had practice.
They grew up as a minority culture.
They were captives, remember, in Babylon?
They had developed the muscle memory of counter-cultural loyalty.
They had practice.
This was different from Peter.
You see, Peter, he lived all his life as a majority culture.
Yes, Rome was really in charge over Palestine at the time, but if you were a Jew growing up in Judea in the first century,
And everybody you knew was a Jew, pretty much.
And the password to normal life in your society was the Shema.
Hero Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one.
And he would have passed that test every day of the week, right?
But when Jesus comes on the scene, Peter has the revelation that the one Lord that he was already loyal to, that one Lord was Jesus.
And on the night of Jesus' trial, Peter finds himself in a situation he's never been in before.
People, his own people, are recognizing that he had been with Jesus and he had a choice.
He could be truthful about it or not.
And three times he denied even knowing Jesus.
Now if a Roman soldier had come into that courtyard and said bow down to Caesar, Peter would have given his life right at that moment.
But that's not what was happening.
People were just asking him,
Hey, do you know Jesus?
And he failed the test.
So what's it like in 21st century England?
What's normal life more like?
I know Sheila and I have talked to Grace.
She goes to a church of England, high school down in Northwich.
And of course, we chose that school not because we knew it would be a paragon of Christianity, but just because we didn't want it to be anti-God if at all possible.
And it's not.
It's a good school, good teachers.
But we asked her, is it hard to be a Christian in your school?
And she said, yeah, so in what ways?
She's like, well, we have these RE lessons or religious education.
Those are fine.
But then when it's just the students talking,
around a table kind of quizzing each other on doctrinal issues that they have to get right for the test.
The way they always preface it is, well, not that I believe this, but this is the doctrine of Christianity.
And then the next person, well, not that I believe this, but of course Jesus rose from the dead or whatever the answer is.
And that's hard.
Isn't that hard?
I mean, we pray for our youth, right?
But pray for ourselves because isn't that kind of what we normally face?
I think the password to normal life nowadays is kind of something like, well, I don't really know Jesus, but I know about him.
That's kind of the password to normal life.
You mark yourself out as different if you actually say, Jesus actually matters to me, not just that I'm aware that he existed.
So I could keep going on about confessing, but I think we need to get to talking about believing.
Let's talk about believing.
Reminder, our stop on the Roman road today is Romans 10, 9.
Let's say it again together.
So how do we apply the cure to our lives?
As we already talked about it, we shift our allegiance.
That's part one of the treatment plan.
But why would we shift that allegiance?
Well, the only reason to shift your allegiance is if you actually believe Jesus is who he says he is, right?
If you think that I'm lying or you think I'm mistaken about who Jesus is, please don't shift your allegiance.
Please don't declare Jesus is Lord.
That would just be succumbing to positive peer pressure.
You know, all the cool kids believe in Jesus.
So I want you to.
That's not the reason we're supposed to believe in Jesus.
No, the change of allegiance comes out of a change of belief.
Right?
The change of allegiance comes out a change of belief.
Belief is the second part of the treatment plan.
Now, note, Paul does not say, believe that Jesus died.
He just skipped straight to resurrection.
And I think this is because the facts of Jesus' death on a cross in Jerusalem were well established at the time.
It was in the records of Pontius Pilate.
It was in the living memory of thousands of people.
And it was not a stretch to believe that Rome crucified someone who claimed to be a king.
Everybody believed Jesus died, but to believe God raised him from the dead, that's a bit of a different story.
Now, there were also hundreds of eyewitnesses that gave eyewitness testimony to the resurrected Jesus as well.
He hung around for 40 days before ascending to heaven, so this was not done in secret.
But come on now, someone coming back to life after being dead for three days, and not just mostly dead, all dead.
That's a princess bride reference if you missed that.
That person coming back to life, someone who was brutally dead.
And even if you spoke with people who saw him, you'd still struggle to believe it, right?
Just like Thomas.
Can we be honest?
That would be hard to believe.
It does strain belief.
But that is the point.
There is no point believing that Jesus did something believable.
Right?
That he's just a human.
We are saying that Jesus is God.
So for him to prove that he's God, he has to do something that otherwise wouldn't be possible, right?
If Jesus stayed dead, his teaching would just have been this misguided love prophet in the wilderness.
We would just kind of have forgotten about him.
But it was his resurrection and those that believed in his resurrection that turned the world upside down.
Resurrection is the proof that Jesus is who he says he is.
And then Paul says, we need to believe this in our heart.
The Greek word for heart is cardia, which means heart.
Waiting, no one thinks that's funny.
I think that's funny.
Cardia, cardio means heart.
It can also generally refers to our thoughts and our feelings.
And so we could talk about going from a head knowledge to a heart knowledge, but I don't really think the Greek
culture of the time would have made those distinctions.
But cardia can also mean the middle.
It can mean the core of something.
Think of the way we use the phrase the heart of the matter, getting to the heart of the matter.
When the Bible says that we need to believe something in our heart or love someone from the heart, it's saying that it needs to be from the core of our person, from the core of our person.
Another way of saying it is this, belief in the resurrection needs to become the foundational truth of our lives.
Belief in the resurrection needs to become the foundational truth of our lives.
In 1 Corinthians 10, Paul is very clear, Christianity as a belief system completely unravels without the resurrection of Jesus.
Let's not pretend there's any other way around this.
If Jesus wasn't raised from the dead, we should just all go home.
And if you wanna leave, you can.
I'm serious.
Like if Jesus wasn't raised from the dead, there's no point being here.
Paul says it this way.
If Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile and you are still in your sins.
If only for this life we have hope in Christ, we are of all people most to be pitied.
But Christ has indeed been raised from the dead for he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet and the last enemy to be destroyed.
is death.
Another way of thinking about it is this, the idea of a foundational truth.
A foundational truth is a mental fallback position.
It's a mental fallback position.
It's the thought we retreat to when life gets tough.
Too often we retreat to really flimsy and temporary comforts when life gets tough.
When we lose our job, we say, oh, well, at least I have my health until we don't.
When we're struggling with our health, we tell ourselves, well, at least I have the NHS until you have to wait a really long time and maybe you don't have what they don't have what you need.
Or when relationships are rocky with someone, we think, well, at least I have this other person who I know will never leave me.
Don't you just see how all these mental fallback positions are all just smoke and mirrors?
They're even the good ones.
They're just smoke and mirrors.
And I really hope this fallback position is the leading atheist one, which is, oh, well, in the end, this is all meaningless and we'll just turn back to dust.
And I don't know, how does that help with anything?
We're just a bag of atoms with temporary consciousness.
I mean, once again, go home and just lay on the couch.
I don't know what to do with that.
But when the resurrection of Jesus is the mental cornerstone of our life, it's different.
The resurrection gives meaning to suffering.
It gives hope to get through hard times.
It will feel awkward at first to have some kind of tough thing happen on the job site and then think, but Jesus has been raised from the dead.
I know that might not seem like it connects, but keep with it.
keep with it because we realize if Jesus was raised from the dead, then suddenly new things become possible.
We realize that things that look hopeless, things that look lifeless, aren't necessarily so.
We realize that there is life on the other side of suffering.
We realize that instead of suffering becoming something we need to avoid at all costs, we can bear up under it knowing that he is with us
Because he's alive, right?
It all hangs together.
When we face death itself, the foundational truth of our lives means that death no longer has power over us, just like it has no power over Jesus.
Death may be the last enemy to be destroyed, but make no mistake, it will be.
And in so many ways, it already is.
So then, if we believe that God raised Jesus from the dead, as a cornerstone thought of our life,
then it just naturally flows back to our first point that we can naturally confess and declare that Jesus is Lord.
These are just two sides of the same coin.
These are two parts of the same treatment.
So let's read the verse together one more time and then I have a couple concluding thoughts.
Let's read it together.
Romans 10, 9.
If you confess with your mouth, Jesus is Lord, and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
Okay, here's a thought, and this is kind of philosophical, but I actually think it's actually really practical.
Question is this, is this just a religious formula?
Is this just a religious formula?
Is this just an A plus B equals C?
Is this just a,
If I confess and believe, God will let me into heaven.
See what I'm saying?
Is this just if I do this, God will do this.
And while of course it's true in a certain sense, God will bring us into heaven if we confess and believe.
I think it misses the point.
God isn't waiting for us to do something, grating us on it.
And then if we confess and believe enough,
He'll give us a piece of cheese called salvation.
We are not rats in a maze.
This is not a mathematical formula.
Let me bring it back to the medical analogy.
Okay, so the doctor says, here's your symptoms.
Here's your disease.
Here's the cure.
The cure is you need to have surgery, which I can provide, and you're gonna have this medication.
And so you say, okay, I will do that.
You show it for the surgery.
The surgery is accomplished successfully.
You take the medication.
You don't then go back to the doctor and say, okay, have I done that well enough?
Will you let me have the healing?
No, the treatment brought the healing.
The treatment is the healing.
The treatment isn't a bargaining chip with the doctor.
The treatment is the thing.
that brings life to your body.
So why is confessing Jesus' Lord necessary for salvation?
It's because the thing that is killing us is our corrupted allegiances.
When self or sin or other powers or the ultimate authority in our lives, they will always lead us down a path of death.
A salvation that doesn't include a change of allegiance from the death masters to the Lord of life isn't salvation at all.
Salvation must include making the Lord of life
the Lord of our lives or else it just doesn't do what it says on the tin.
It isn't actually a salvation.
If Jesus isn't our Lord, then our Lord is something or someone that's killing us.
Listen, Jesus isn't on a power trip.
Jesus isn't on a power trip.
He doesn't need your allegiance to feel good about himself.
He is rescuing us from the powers of death
by enabling us to shift our allegiance from those powers of death to him.
And why do we need to believe that Jesus has been raised from the dead?
Because believing that Jesus is master over death is how we conquer death.
If we are in Christ, we can look at death square in the face and say, where O death is your victory?
Where O grave is your sting?
Thanks be to God.
He gives us the victory.
If the Lord of life is Lord of your life, and if you believe that he conquered death and will bring you with him through death, then you are already saved from death, saved.
It has no power over you.
And that state of salvation just continues into eternity with him.
You don't get salvation then, you get it now.
Jesus' name means the Lord is salvation.
So if you have Jesus as Lord of your life, you have salvation now.
So it's not a religious formula.
It is the actual thing.
It's the treatment.
It's how we experience salvation is saying, Jesus, no, you're Lord of my life, not these other things.
It's saying, I don't have to be afraid of death because I believe that you rose from the dead and you'll bring with me through death.
That is being saved.
with the Lord of life and control of our lives and everything else that brings us death no longer in control of our lives.
And band, you can come.
Well, I have one more thought.
And while I 100% believe what I just said, I need to give you my last thought, which may sound like a contradiction, but just go with me here.
We can't confess and believe.
At least we can't do it perfectly.
We can't do it perfectly.
We can move the allegiance of our lives towards Jesus.
We can move the belief in His resurrection towards the central core of our lives.
But we're never going to get 100% there because we're human.
And this is actually freeing.
This is freeing because
If you've believed what I've told you today, if I've been a good preacher and you've believed what I've said, then you're maybe thinking right now, what if I don't confess and believe enough?
What if I don't confess and believe correctly?
What if I'm doing it wrong?
Relax.
You are doing it wrong.
And so am I.
What I mean is if we had to confess and believe perfectly, then Jesus wouldn't be Lord.
Perfection would be Lord.
And perfection is a horrible Lord.
Perfection is a horrible Lord.
Perfection's weapon is the fear of failure.
and our lives are not meant to be driven by fear.
And before you quoted that meme in your mind, yes, Jesus did say, be perfect as your father in heaven is perfect.
But I believe that was about the direction of our lives.
Our goal is to be like Jesus.
I'm not saying settle for a weak faith.
I'm saying aim for perfection, but don't rely on it.
Aim for perfection, but don't rely on it.
Rely on Jesus.
Remember Peter, the one who denied that he knew Jesus.
He did it twice.
And then on the third time, just as Jesus was walking through the courtyard, he added a few choice cuss words in addition to his denial.
And then Jesus saw him and he saw Jesus.
That was a very awkward moment.
And of course,
Peter realized his failure and he ran out weeping.
How did Jesus respond?
Well, in the moment he couldn't do anything, he was in chains.
But after his resurrection, they had a conversation over breakfast.
I'm skipping stuff, but go with me.
They're having conversation over breakfast, after his resurrection.
And Jesus just asks him, Peter,
Do you love me?
He doesn't say, Peter, am I Lord yet?
Peter, do you believe enough yet?
He just says, do you love me?
Yes, Jesus needs to be Lord.
Yes, we need to believe in his resurrection, but more than that, the question is just this.
Do you love Jesus?
Do you love him?
If he's the Lord of life, if he's the Lord of life and he conquered death, and he did it at the cost of his own life, at the cost of incredible suffering, because he loved you,
Doesn't that make you want to love Him in return?
In 1 John 4, it says, we love because He first loved us.
And if we love Him, if we love Him, we set the direction of our life towards the Lordship of Christ.
Jesus, you are Lord, I declare that publicly.
And until my dying day, I'm going to find all the parts of my life that aren't quite under your Lordship, and I'm going to submit them to you.
And that's the direction of my life.
And if you love Him, you say, I believe you rose from the dead, even though that sounds crazy and maybe I don't quite fully believe it, but I'm gonna believe it.
You set the direction of your life towards taking that truth of the resurrection into the core of your life as your foundational thought.
If we love Him, if we love Him, and we do our best in the lordship and belief departments,
We are just as saved as the Apostle Peter.
If we love him and we do our best in the lordship and belief departments, we're just as saved as Peter.
And even our love will be imperfect.
That's okay.
Remember, perfection isn't Lord.
Jesus is Lord.
Perfection is not Lord.
Can you stand with me as we pray?
I just have a sense that to borrow the medical analogy one more time, that there are people here that basically understand what's being said, and you understand
Enough.
But you've been avoiding the treatment.
The idea of actually surrendering your own life to the lordship of anything else other than you just terrifies you.
I just want to pray for you right now.
I'm not even going to challenge you.
I'm just going to pray for you.
Jesus, for those that are afraid,
to surrender to you.
I just pray that you would wrap them in your love so much.
That they would not be afraid of a king, even though you are a king, but they would see you as the servant that came to love them well.
Give them the courage
to submit to the treatment, the only way to be cured.
Give them the courage to do so.
So right now, let's just as a group, let's just take a moment and just take self inventory of how much Jesus is Lord in our lives.
And let's just take another step towards Him as our Lord.
Take another step of surrender towards Him.
Just do that right now in your own heart.
Jesus, you are Lord.
Can we just say it together?
We confess that publicly.
You are Lord.
And in all the ways that we are imperfect at surrender, help us get a little bit better this week.
Help us get a little bit better this week in surrendering to you and letting you be Lord of our lives.
And Lord, we believe that you rose from the dead.
And even though we believe that, I pray right now that you would help us to move that thought a bit closer to the center of our lives.
Everyone just begin to pray along those lines.
Just ask that he would help you to move that thought more to the core of your life.
God, I pray that you would remind us this week when we face suffering, when we face something challenging, when we face doubt, when we face fear.
Lord, even though it might not seem connected, I pray that you would remind us.
But yeah, but I rose from the dead for you.
Let's fall back to that position of strength.
And Lord, we just want to finish today by just telling you how much we love you.
Just tell him right now, just love on Jesus for a second.
I love you, Jesus.
I worship you, Jesus.
I love you, Lord.
I can't even love you perfectly, but I love you as best I can.
And I want to love you, Lord.
I love you, Jesus.
We've come to the end of this week's message.
We hope you've been impacted and inspired.
Please keep up to date with everything that's happening by visiting our website at www.livechurchbarrington.com.